[guides] guides: Add postgres migration guidelines (#6596)
mattermost/docs: source/guides/postgres-migration.rst

To streamline the migration process and alleviate any potential challenges, we have prepared a comprehensive set of guidelines to facilitate a smooth transition. Additionally, we want to offer recommendations for various tools that have proven to be highly effective in simplifying your migration efforts.

.. note::

   These guidelines are in development and we are working to streamline the migration process. We plan to improve this guide by updating it as new information becomes available. It is essential to note that it does not encompass migration configurations for any plugins, such as Focalboard and Playbooks. If your system utilizes these plugins, we highly advise exercising patience until we incorporate the necessary configurations specifically tailored to ensure a smooth transition for those plugins as well. Please use this guide as a starting point and always backup your database before starting a migration.

.. contents:: On this page:
  :backlinks: top
  :local:
  :depth: 1

> 

Reviewer: I think a known issues table might be a good addition here.

Author: I tried to collect as much as known issues and tried to address "Schema diffs" section. I think we can add a section for known issues & troubleshooting once these gets accumulated.

Required tools
--------------

-  Install ``pgLoader``. See the official `installation
   guide <https://pgloader.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html>`__.
-  Install morph CLI via running the following command:

   -  ``go install github.com/mattermost/morph/cmd/morph@v1``

-  Optinally install ``dbcmp`` to compare the data after a migration:

   -  ``go install github.com/mattermost/dbcmp/cmd/dbcmp@latest``

Before the migration
--------------------

-  Backup your MySQL data.

> -  Confirm your Mattermost version. See the **About** modal for details. 

Reviewer: @isacikgoz do we have a min MM version we would recommend? I would certainly like to call out being on a supported ESR.

Author: I think we can add that, for now it looks like the minimum support version is `v6.4` ESR as we require morph based schema migrations. So if they have version before `v6.4` they need to upgrade it first, then conduct the migration. Shall we add that info?

Author: @nab-77 added a note 👍

-  Determine the migration window needed. This process requires you to stop the Mattermost Server during the migration.
-  See the `schema-diffs <#schema-diffs>`__ section to ensure data compatibility between schemas.

> -  Prepare your PostgreSQL environment by creating a database and user. See the `database </install/prepare-mattermost-database.html>`__ documentation for details.

Reviewer: @isacikgoz do we have a preference for pgsql version here? (outside of ensuring its a supported version).

.. code:: sql

   DELETE FROM mattermost.Audits where LENGTH(Action) > 512;

Full-text indexes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It's possible that some words in the ``Posts`` and ``FileInfo`` tables can exceed the `limits of the maximum token length <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/textsearch-limitations.html>`__ for full text search indexing. In these cases, we recommend dropping the ``idx_posts_message_txt`` and ``idx_fileinfo_content_txt`` indexes from the PostgreSQL schema, and creating these indexes after the migration by running following queries:

To drop indexes, run the following commands before the migration:

.. code:: sql

   DROP INDEX IF EXISTS idx_posts_message_txt;
   DROP INDEX IF EXISTS idx_fileinfo_content_txt;

To re-create indexes, run the following once the migration is completed:

.. code:: sql

   CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_posts_message_txt ON posts USING gin(to_tsvector('english', message));
   CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_fileinfo_content_txt ON fileinfo USING gin(to_tsvector('english', content));

Migrate the data
----------------

Once we set the schema to desired state, we can start migrating the **data** by running ``pgLoader`` \*\*

> \*\* Use the following configuration for the baseline of the data migration:

Reviewer: @isacikgoz what are you thoughts on us providing the migration.load template for users to download/edit? Link here maybe?

Author: The template is actually on the repo, being used by the workflow: https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost/blob/master/server/tests/template.load we can add the link here.

   SET MySQL PARAMETERS
         net_read_timeout  = '120',
         net_write_timeout = '120'

   CAST column Channels.Type to channel_type drop typemod,
        column Teams.Type to team_type drop typemod,
        column UploadSessions.Type to upload_session_type drop typemod,
        column Drafts.Priority to text,
        type int when (= precision 11) to integer drop typemod,
        type bigint when (= precision 20) to bigint drop typemod,
        type text to varchar drop typemod,
        type tinyint when (<= precision 4) to boolean using tinyint-to-boolean,
        type json to jsonb drop typemod

   MATERIALIZE VIEWS exclude_products
        excluding table names matching ~<IR_>, ~<focalboard>

   BEFORE LOAD DO
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA public RENAME TO {{ .source_schema }}; $$

   AFTER LOAD DO
        $$ UPDATE {{ .source_schema }}.db_migrations set name='add_createat_to_teamembers' where version=92; $$,
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA {{ .source_schema }} RENAME TO public; $$;

Once you save this configuration file, eg. ``migration.load``, you can run the ``pgLoader`` with following command:

.. code:: bash

   pgLoader migration.load > migration.log

> 

Reviewer: Do we want to place a note here to remind users to run the commands to re-create the indexes as noted in lines 113/114?

Author: Sure, I can add that.

To streamline the migration process and alleviate any potential challenges, we have prepared a comprehensive set of guidelines to facilitate a smooth transition. Additionally, we want to offer recommendations for various tools that have proven to be highly effective in simplifying your migration efforts.

.. note::

   These guidelines are in development and we are working to streamline the migration process. We plan to improve this guide by updating it as new information becomes available. It is essential to note that it does not encompass migration configurations for any plugins, such as Focalboard and Playbooks. If your system utilizes these plugins, we highly advise exercising patience until we incorporate the necessary configurations specifically tailored to ensure a smooth transition for those plugins as well. Please use this guide as a starting point and always backup your database before starting a migration.

.. contents:: On this page:
  :backlinks: top
  :local:
  :depth: 1

Required tools
--------------

-  Install ``pgLoader``. See the official `installation
   guide <https://pgloader.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html>`__.

> -  Install morph CLI via running the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Install morph CLI by running the following command:
```

   -  ``go install github.com/mattermost/morph/cmd/morph@v1``

-  Optinally install ``dbcmp`` to compare the data after a migration:

   -  ``go install github.com/mattermost/dbcmp/cmd/dbcmp@latest``

Before the migration
--------------------

.. note::

>    This guide requires at least a schema of v6.4. So, if you have an earlier version and planning to migrate, please update your Mattermost Server to v6.4 at least. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This guide requires a schema of v6.4 or later. So, if you have an earlier version and planning to migrate, please update your Mattermost Server to v6.4 at a minimum. 
```

> -  Backup your MySQL data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Back up your MySQL data.
```

-  Determine the migration window needed. This process requires you to stop the Mattermost Server during the migration.
-  See the `schema-diffs <#schema-diffs>`__ section to ensure data compatibility between schemas.
-  Prepare your PostgreSQL environment by creating a database and user. See the `database </install/prepare-mattermost-database.html>`__ documentation for details.

Prepare target database
-----------------------

-  Clone the ``mattermost`` repository for your specific version:
   ``git clone -b <your current version (eg. release-7.8)> git@github.com:mattermost/mattermost.git --depth=1``
-  ``cd`` into ``mattermost`` project*.
-  Create a PostgreSQL database using morph CLI with the following command:

.. code:: bash

   morph apply up --driver postgres --dsn "postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/<target_db_mame>?sslmode=disable" --path ./db/migrations/postgres --number -1

\* After ``v8`` due to project re-organization, the migrations directory has been changed to ``./server/channels/db/migrations/postgres/`` relative to project root. Therefore ``cd`` into ``mattermost/server/channels``.

Schema diffs
------------

> Before the migration, due to differences between two schemas, some manual steps may required to have an error-free migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before the migration, due to differences between two schemas, some manual steps may be required for an error-free migration.
```

FileInfo         Name             text -> varchar(256)
FileInfo         MimeType         text -> varchar(256)
LinkMetadata     URL              text -> varchar(2048)
RemoteClusters   SiteURL          text -> varchar(512)
RemoteClusters   Topics           text -> varchar(512)
Sessions         DeviceId         text -> varchar(512)
Systems          Value            text -> varchar(1024)
UploadSessions   FileName         text -> varchar(256)
UploadSessions   Path             text -> varchar(512)
================ ================ =====================

As you can see, there are several occurrences where the schema can differ and data size constraints within the PostgreSQL schema can result in errors. Several reports have been received from our community that ``LinkMetadata`` and ``FileInfo`` tables had some overflows, so we recommend checking these tables in particular. Please do check if your data in the MySQL schema exceeds these limitations. You can check if there are any required deletions. For example, to do so in the ``Audits`` table/``Action`` column; run:

.. code:: sql

   DELETE FROM mattermost.Audits where LENGTH(Action) > 512;

Full-text indexes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> It's possible that some words in the ``Posts`` and ``FileInfo`` tables can exceed the `limits of the maximum token length <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/textsearch-limitations.html>`__ for full text search indexing. In these cases, we recommend dropping the ``idx_posts_message_txt`` and ``idx_fileinfo_content_txt`` indexes from the PostgreSQL schema, and creating these indexes after the migration by running following queries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's possible that some words in the ``Posts`` and ``FileInfo`` tables can exceed the `limits of the maximum token length <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/textsearch-limitations.html>`__ for full text search indexing. In these cases, we recommend dropping the ``idx_posts_message_txt`` and ``idx_fileinfo_content_txt`` indexes from the PostgreSQL schema, and creating these indexes after the migration by running the following queries:
```

To drop indexes, run the following commands before the migration:

.. code:: sql

   DROP INDEX IF EXISTS idx_posts_message_txt;
   DROP INDEX IF EXISTS idx_fileinfo_content_txt;

Migrate the data
----------------

> Once we set the schema to desired state, we can start migrating the **data** by running ``pgLoader`` \*\*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once we set the schema to a desired state, we can start migrating the **data** by running ``pgLoader`` \*\*
```

        create no tables,
        create no indexes,
        preserve index names

   SET PostgreSQL PARAMETERS
        maintenance_work_mem to '128MB',
        work_mem to '12MB'

   SET MySQL PARAMETERS
         net_read_timeout  = '120',
         net_write_timeout = '120'

   CAST column Channels.Type to channel_type drop typemod,
        column Teams.Type to team_type drop typemod,
        column UploadSessions.Type to upload_session_type drop typemod,
        column Drafts.Priority to text,
        type int when (= precision 11) to integer drop typemod,
        type bigint when (= precision 20) to bigint drop typemod,
        type text to varchar drop typemod,
        type tinyint when (<= precision 4) to boolean using tinyint-to-boolean,
        type json to jsonb drop typemod

   MATERIALIZE VIEWS exclude_products
        excluding table names matching ~<IR_>, ~<focalboard>

   BEFORE LOAD DO
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA public RENAME TO {{ .source_schema }}; $$

   AFTER LOAD DO
        $$ UPDATE {{ .source_schema }}.db_migrations set name='add_createat_to_teamembers' where version=92; $$,
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA {{ .source_schema }} RENAME TO public; $$;

> Once you save this configuration file, eg. ``migration.load``, you can run the ``pgLoader`` with following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you save this configuration file, e.g. ``migration.load``, you can run the ``pgLoader`` with the following command:
```

Migration Guidelines from MySQL to PostgreSQL
=============================================

.. include:: ../_static/badges/allplans-selfhosted.rst
  :start-after: :nosearch:

As of version 8.0, a significant decision has been made to establish PostgreSQL as the default database for Mattermost, a step taken to enhance the platform’s performance and capabilities. Recognizing the importance of supporting the community members who are interested in migrating from a MySQL database, we have taken proactive measures to provide them with some assistance. To streamline the migration process and alleviate any potential challenges, we have prepared a comprehensive set of basic guidelines to facilitate a smooth transition. Additionally, we want to offer recommendations for various tools that have proven to be highly effective in simplifying the migration efforts.

> Note that this guideline is still in development and we are working to streamline the migration process. We are planning to improve this guide by periodically updating it. Please use this guide as a starting point and always backup your database before starting the migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that these guidelines are in development and we are working to streamline the migration process. We plan to improve this guide by updating it as new information becomes available. Please use this guide as a starting point and always backup your database before starting a migration.
```

Table of Contents
-----------------

-  `Required tools <#required-tools>`__
-  `Before the migration <#before-the-migration>`__
-  `Prepare target database <#prepare-target-database>`__
-  `Schema Differences <#schema-diffs>`__
-  `Migrate the data <#migrate-the-data>`__
-  `Compare the data <#compare-the-data>`__
-  `Notes <#notes>`__

Required tools
--------------

-  Install ``pgLoader``. See the official `installation
   guide <https://pgloader.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html>`__.
-  Install morph CLI via running the following command:

   -  ``go install github.com/mattermost/morph/cmd/morph@v1``

-  Optinally install ``dbcmp`` to compare the data after a migration:

   -  ``go install github.com/mattermost/dbcmp/cmd/dbcmp@latest``

Before the migration
--------------------

-  Backup your MySQL data.

> -  Find your mattermost version. You can look to the about modal from the web app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Confirm your Mattermost version. See the **About** modal for details. 
```

.. code:: sql

   DELETE FROM mattermost.Audits where LENGTH(Action) > 512;

Full-text indexes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There is a possibility where some words in the ``Posts`` ans ``FileInfo`` tables can exceed the `limits of the maximum token length <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/textsearch-limitations.html>`__ for full text search indexing. In that case we recommend dropping ``idx_posts_message_txt`` and ``idx_fileinfo_content_txt`` indexes from the PostgreSQL schema and creating these indexes after the migration by running following queries:

Tp drop indexes run these before the migration:

.. code:: sql

   DROP INDEX IF EXISTS idx_posts_message_txt;
   DROP INDEX IF EXISTS idx_fileinfo_content_txt;

> To re-create indexes, run these once the migration is completed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To re-create indexes, run the following once the migration is completed:
```

        create no tables,
        create no indexes,
        preserve index names

   SET PostgreSQL PARAMETERS
        maintenance_work_mem to '128MB',
        work_mem to '12MB'

   SET MySQL PARAMETERS
         net_read_timeout  = '120',
         net_write_timeout = '120'

   CAST column Channels.Type to channel_type drop typemod,
        column Teams.Type to team_type drop typemod,
        column UploadSessions.Type to upload_session_type drop typemod,
        column Drafts.Priority to text,
        type int when (= precision 11) to integer drop typemod,
        type bigint when (= precision 20) to bigint drop typemod,
        type text to varchar drop typemod,
        type tinyint when (<= precision 4) to boolean using tinyint-to-boolean,
        type json to jsonb drop typemod

   MATERIALIZE VIEWS exclude_products
        excluding table names matching ~<IR_>, ~<focalboard>

   BEFORE LOAD DO
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA public RENAME TO {{ .source_schema }}; $$

   AFTER LOAD DO
        $$ UPDATE {{ .source_schema }}.db_migrations set name='add_createat_to_teamembers' where version=92; $$,
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA {{ .source_schema }} RENAME TO public; $$;

> Once you save this configuration file eg. ``migration.load``, you can run the ``pgLoader`` with following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you save this configuration file, eg. ``migration.load``, you can run the ``pgLoader`` with following command:
```

.. code:: bash

   pgLoader migration.load > migration.log

> Feel free to contribute and/or report your findings through the migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Feel free to contribute to and/or report your findings through your migration to us.
```

Compare the data
----------------

We internally developed a tool to simplify the process of comparing contents of two databases. The ``dbcmp`` tool compares every table and reports whether if there is a diversity between two schemas.

The tool has a few flags needs to be supplied to run a comparison:

.. code:: sh

   Usage:
     dbcmp [flags]

   Flags:
         --exclude strings   exclude tables from comparison, takes comma-separated values.
     -h, --help              help for dbcmp
         --source string     source database dsn
         --target string     target database dsn
     -v, --version           version for dbcmp

For our case we can simply run the following command:

.. code:: sh

   dbcmp --source "${MYSQL_DSN}" --target "${POSTGRES_DSN}" --exclude="db_migrations","ir_","focalboard","systems"

> Note that the migration guide only covers the tables for Mattermost channels, the support for other plugins such as Boards and Playbooks will be added in the future. Another exlusion we are making is in the ``db_migrations`` table which has a small difference (a typo in a single migration name) creates a diff. Since we created the Postgres schema with morph and the official mattermost source, we can consider to skip it safely. On the other hand, ``systems`` table may contain additional diffs if there was extra keys added during some of the migrations. Consider excluding ``systems`` table if you run into issues and do a manual comparison as the data in the ``systems`` table is relatively smaller in size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this migration guide only covers the tables for Mattermost channels. Support for other plugins, such as Playbooks, will be added in the future. 

Another exclusion we are making is in the ``db_migrations`` table which has a small difference (a typo in a single migration name) creates a diff. Since we created the PostgreSQL schema with morph, and the official ``mattermost`` source, we can skip it safely without concerns. On the other hand, ``systems`` table may contain additional diffs if there were extra keys added during some of the migrations. Consider excluding the ``systems`` table if you run into issues, and perform a manual comparison as the data in the ``systems`` table is relatively smaller in size.
```

> Notes

Reviewer: Recommend we move this to the top after the intro but before we get into the steps.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. This becomes our TL;DR :)

FileInfo         Name             text -> varchar(256)
FileInfo         MimeType         text -> varchar(256)
LinkMetadata     URL              text -> varchar(2048)
RemoteClusters   SiteURL          text -> varchar(512)
RemoteClusters   Topics           text -> varchar(512)
Sessions         DeviceId         text -> varchar(512)
Systems          Value            text -> varchar(1024)
UploadSessions   FileName         text -> varchar(256)
UploadSessions   Path             text -> varchar(512)
================ ================ =====================

As you can see, there are several occurrences where the schema can differ and data size constraints within the PostgreSQL schema can result in errors. Several reports have been received from our community that ``LinkMetadata`` and ``FileInfo`` tables had some overflows, so we recommend checking these tables in particular. Please do check if your data in the MySQL schema exceeds these limitations. You can check if there are any required deletions. For example, to do so in the ``Audits`` table/``Action`` column; run:

.. code:: sql

   DELETE FROM mattermost.Audits where LENGTH(Action) > 512;

Full-text indexes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> It's possible that some words in the ``Posts`` ans ``FileInfo`` tables can exceed the `limits of the maximum token length <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/11/textsearch-limitations.html>`__ for full text search indexing. In these cases, we recommend dropping the ``idx_posts_message_txt`` and ``idx_fileinfo_content_txt`` indexes from the PostgreSQL schema, and creating these indexes after the migration by running following queries:

Reviewer 3: Typo at `ans`

   CAST column Channels.Type to channel_type drop typemod,
        column Teams.Type to team_type drop typemod,
        column UploadSessions.Type to upload_session_type drop typemod,
        column Drafts.Priority to text,
        type int when (= precision 11) to integer drop typemod,
        type bigint when (= precision 20) to bigint drop typemod,
        type text to varchar drop typemod,
        type tinyint when (<= precision 4) to boolean using tinyint-to-boolean,
        type json to jsonb drop typemod

   MATERIALIZE VIEWS exclude_products
        excluding table names matching ~<IR_>, ~<focalboard>

   BEFORE LOAD DO
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA public RENAME TO {{ .source_schema }}; $$

   AFTER LOAD DO
        $$ UPDATE {{ .source_schema }}.db_migrations set name='add_createat_to_teamembers' where version=92; $$,
        $$ ALTER SCHEMA {{ .source_schema }} RENAME TO public; $$;

Once you save this configuration file, eg. ``migration.load``, you can run the ``pgLoader`` with following command:

.. code:: bash

   pgLoader migration.load > migration.log

Feel free to contribute to and/or report your findings through your migration to us.

Compare the data
----------------

> We internally developed a tool to simplify the process of comparing contents of two databases. The ``dbcmp`` tool compares every table and reports whether if there is a diversity between two schemas.

Reviewer 3: diversion

The tool includes a few flags to run a comparison:

.. code:: sh

   Usage:
     dbcmp [flags]

   Flags:
         --exclude strings   exclude tables from comparison, takes comma-separated values.
     -h, --help              help for dbcmp
         --source string     source database dsn
         --target string     target database dsn
     -v, --version           version for dbcmp

For our case we can simply run the following command:

.. code:: sh

>    dbcmp --source "${MYSQL_DSN}" --target "${POSTGRES_DSN}" --exclude="db_migrations","ir_","focalboard","systems"

Reviewer 3: comma-separated values would usually mean a single string with comma separated values. But here, it looks like separate string values separated by commas?

Reviewer 3: Yeah I think that would be less confusing IMO.
